Vol.:(0123456789)Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:70793–70814
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-024-18331-8
1 3
Seagull optimization algorithm for node localization 
in wireless sensor networks
Yogendra Mohan1,2  · Rajesh Kumar Yadav2 · Manisha Manjul3
Received: 29 November 2022 / Revised: 4 January 2024 / Accepted: 19 January 2024 /  
Published online: 5 February 2024 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2024
Abstract
Numerous applications of wireless sensor networks (WSNs) highly depend on the node 
location, such as maritime rescue, agriculture, and hazardous environments. GPS-enabled 
sensors are not cost-effective or energy efficient. Henceforth, the precise location of sen-
sor nodes significantly impacts the performance of WSNs. Finding the position of a target 
node (an unknown node) is known as node localization. Gaussian noise and RSSI are cost-
effective approaches for estimating the location of a target node. In this paper, the Seagull 
optimization algorithm and its enhanced versions are applied to increase the NL accuracy 
of localized nodes. To enhance the accuracy and improve the randomness of the seagull 
optimization algorithm (SOA)., levy flight and a chaotic map are employed in this work 
to enhance the seagull optimization algorithm Furthermore, the chaotic map-based SOA 
(C-SOA) and the Levy flight-based SOA (LF-SOA) are used for node location in WSNs. 
The performance evaluation and result comparison of SOA, C-SOA, and LF-SOA show 
that LF-SOA is better than C-SOA and SOA.
Keywords Node localization (NL) · Seagull optimization algorithm (SOA) · Chaotic map · 
Levy flight
1 Introduction
Wireless sensor nodes are tiny, low-power gadgets with an antenna, an integrated CPU, and 
a radio that runs on batteries. To monitor and record important data or events, WSNs [20] 
are made up of numerous sensor nodes outfitted with specialized transducers and radio 
communications equipment. WSNs have piqued the interest of all researchers due to their 
application-oriented approach, which identifies the particular services provided by every 
 * Yogendra Mohan 
 yogendra.mohan@gmail.com; ymo@nerist.ac.in
1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, North Eastern Regional Institute of Science 
and Technology Nirjuli, Itanagar 791109, Arunachal Pradesh, India
2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Delhi Technological University, 
New Delhi 110 042, India
3 Computer Science and Application, G.B. Pant DSEU Okhala-1 Campus, New Delhi 110077, India
70794 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:70793–70814
1 3
application. Henceforth, WSNs are becoming progressively popular in terms of applica-
tions, services, and choice. Since these sensor networks have begun to become a part of our 
daily lives, such as smart homes, cities, agriculture, transportation, etc. With all these ben-
efits, WSNs have a lot of limitations, like the adoption of new technologies like cloud, fog 
with the emerging applications, and computational and communication resources of sensor 
nodes. Moreover, WSNs face many challenges, like robust routing, securing devices, and 
tracking device location (node localization). Among all these, node localizations (NL) are 
one of the prior and demanding challenges. The sensors can be deployed on earth, under -
ground, or underwater. It is difficult to localize the sensors deployed.
The precise localization of sensor nodes substantially impacts the functioning of 
WSNs. The process of determining the exact locations of the sensor nodes in WSNs is 
known as positioning or NL [26– 28]. Despite being a standard positioning technology, 
GPS has a high energy consumption [30, 31], making it unsuitable for NL in WSNs. 
Numerous variables impact the accuracy of NL, and they are the network design, the den-
sity of anchor nodes, and the measuring area’s geometric shape. To improve the accuracy 
of NL, a meta-heuristic optimization algorithm is modified and used. The simulation is 
carried out for sensor networks of different sizes, ranging from 25 to 150 TNs and 15 to 
90 ANs, and the distance between ANs and TN is calculated using the RSSI and Gaussian 
mixture model.
In localization, meta-heuristic optimization algorithms [1, 7–9, 41, 42, 46–48] are gain-
ing popularity. Seagull lives in colonies; the seagull’s migration patterns and attacking 
behaviors inspire the seagull optimization scheme. The migration and attacking behavior of 
the seagull are mathematically modeled with the exploration and exploitation phase. Vari-
ous research work has accounted for that exploration is essential for addressing optimiza-
tion issues. The migration and attacking behavior of seagull birds are modeled to estimate 
the target nodes. In the exploration phase, Seagulls move and change their position and 
find the best position. In the exploitation phase, seagulls attack the prey. The existing SOA 
algorithm is based on a random number. Although SOA has a global exploration potential, 
it has drawbacks such as late convergence and a tendency to get stuck in local optima. 
That is why SOA is modified using a chaotic map and levy flight. The comparative per -
formance analysis among the SOA, C-SOA, and LF-SOA is performed, and according to 
experimental findings, it is confirmed that the LF-SOA significantly outperforms the SOA 
and C-SOA in terms of NL accuracy and NL time.
The following are the major contributions of the current article:
• The existing SOA algorithms are modified using a chaotic map and levy flight schemes. 
The modified meta-heuristic algorithms, namely C-SOA and LF-SOA, have been used 
for NL optimization.
• In C-SOA, ten different chaotic maps have been chosen for the performance test. Out of 
these, the logistic map was found to be best suitable for exploration.
• In LF-SOA, exploration power is provided by the levy-flight distribution.
• Comparative analysis among SOA, C-SOA, and LF-SOA is performed.
The novelty of this paper is to enhance the accuracy of the NL optimization, SOA 
hybridized using levy-flight and chaotic map to emphasize on scalability and robust-
ness to node failures. There are several advantages of using chaotic maps and levy-
flight for NL optimization as follows. Scalability: In large-scale WSNs, NL using 
chaotic maps is useful. The network adapts to changes in size and density while 
retaining precise localization thanks to their help in organizing and coordinating 
70795 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:70793–70814 
1 3
nodes effectively. Robustness to Node Failures: Chaotic maps offer resilience to node 
failures. Chaotic maps can aid other nodes in swiftly adjusting to the changing net-
work architecture and allowing localization to continue without major interruptions 
when a node fails or departs the network.
The remaining parts of the manuscript are divided into the following sections: 
Sect.  2 is the related work of different meta-heuristic optimization algorithms dealing 
with NL. Section  3 briefly introduces the chaotic map, levy flight, and SOA. Section  4 
covers the proposed C-SOA and LF-SOA. Section  5 analyzes the NL simulation results 
of SOA, C-SOA, and LF-SOA. Section  6 presents the conclusion and future research 
work.
2  Related work
This section reviews the literature work based on node localization for WSNs. Yaming 
et al. [24] have proposed a scheme that is found suitable for environments where an offline 
calibration phase for the path-loss component is not feasible. The RSSI technique esti-
mates the distance between the anchor node (AN) and the target node (TN). The simulation 
results demonstrate that the suggested technique has a better NL accuracy than existing 
methods. The limitation of the proposed scheme is the same value of the path-loss expo-
nent is taken for the different measurements, which may affect the node localization accu-
racy. Ziwen et al. [5] have proposed a Multi-objective PSO for the NL. The localization 
accuracy and average node localization error are improved, while the convergence rate is 
improved. The performance parameters are convergence rate, node localization accuracy, 
and average node localization error.
Sankalp et al. [4] have proposed a Butterfly Optimization Algorithm (BFOA) for NL. 
BFOA is compared with PSO and FFA. The performance of BFOA is better than PSO and 
FFOA. The trilateration method is used for distance computation between AN and TN, 
but the value of the environment constant and Path loss component is not mentioned. The 
performance parameters are the mean of NL, mean of NL error, and mean of computation 
time. Mihoubi et al. [19] have proposed an RSSI-based Bat optimization algorithm (BOA), 
and the result obtained shows that the Bat algorithm is more efficient than PSO and DE. 
RSSI scheme is used for distance estimation between AN and TN, but the value of envi-
ronment constant and Path loss component is not mentioned. The performance parameters 
are mean NL error and mean NL time. The simulation result showed that the accuracy 
and convergence rate of the Bat algorithm is better than PSO and DE. Rajakumar et al. 
[3] proposed a GWO simulation algorithm. An improved DV-Hop method is proposed to 
resolve the problems with the DV-Hop algorithm for NL. The performance parameters NL 
accuracy, computation time, and minimum localization error are compared with PSO and 
GWO. The convergence rate and NL accuracy are high compared to the PSO and MBA, 
and NL error is low. Tu Li et  al. [11] have proposed a DV-HOP-based PSO algorithm. 
The chaotic map is hybridized to enhance the NL accuracy and minimize the computation 
delay. So many chaotic maps are available, and a sine chaotic map is chosen for simula-
tions. It is not mentioned why only a sine map is chosen for it. The performance parameters 
are NL and NL Error.
Huthaifa et al. [2] have proposed an SSO algorithm for NL. Mean NL error, NL compu-
tation time, and the total number of nodes localized are the performance parameters of the 
proposed scheme. The NL accuracy is improved when the AN density increases concerning 
70796 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:70793–70814
1 3
the number of TNs. The computation time for all localization methods is observed to grow 
as the number of TNs and ANs increases, although the SSOA has the fastest computation 
time compared to PSO, BOA, FFA, and GWO. The performance of SSOA is better than 
BOA, FA, PSO, and GWO for all the performance parameters. Ju Liu et al. [37] have pro-
posed a hybrid MCB-PSO algorithm for NL. The WSN environment is 3-dimensional. The 
anchor and target nodes are mobile. The convergence rate is improved. The main drawback 
of the MCB method is the random generation of node placements in an anchor box, and 
there needs to be a searching direction, which results in low localization efficiency and 
high computation time. The performance parameters are NL error and computation time. 
Ling Song et al. [36] have proposed the Monte Carlo NL algorithm, which is hybridized 
with QUasi-Affine TRansformation Evolutionary (QUATRE) optimization. The advan-
tage of the proposed algorithm is that only 30 anchor nodes are deployed for the localiza-
tion of 320 target nodes, and the enhanced QUATRE optimization-based Monte Carlo NL 
scheme offers increased positioning accuracy and convergence rate. Although the proposed 
algorithm requires some hardware, it is cost-effective. Yeasir et al. [35] have proposed a 
GWO-based compressive sensing (CS-GWO) algorithm. An energy-efficient bio-inspired 
NL algorithm and clustering algorithms are implemented in Unnamed Aerial Vehicles net-
works. The limitation of the proposed scheme is all sensor nodes are GPS-enabled, which 
consumes more power. The performance parameters are Node Localization, Mean Node 
Localization error, and clustering.
Chuku et  al. [25] have proposed utilizing outlier identification techniques to mitigate 
the impact of such disproportionately inaccurate distance estimates in RSSI-based location 
estimation. Three distinct node localization methods are proposed to reduce node locali-
zation mistakes in shadowed environments that employ outlier identification. NL error is 
reduced in the proposed scheme. The distance between the AN and TN is estimated using 
the RSSI of the RF signal, but the environment constant and path loss component value are 
essential to the accuracy of node localization. The environment constant value lies between 
2 and 5, and the fixed value of path loss exponent 2.3 is chosen without any calibration, 
which may affect the NL accuracy. Pudi et al. [12] have designed a Group Teaching Opti-
mization Algorithm (GTOA) for indoor NL. Comparative results of the GTOA are better 
than the PSO, krill herd algorithm (KHA), GWO, cuckoo search optimization (CSO), and 
firefly algorithm (FFA). The performance parameters are NL and NL Error. The KHA, 
PSO, CSO, GWO, and FFA-based NL algorithms have higher NL errors of 0.36, 0.57, 
0.38, 0.53, and 0.51, respectively. The GTOA scheme for NL has achieved a reduced 
NL error of 0.16. Cheng et  al. [18] have proposed a DV-Hop-based Modified Archime-
des optimization Algorithm (MAOA) for NL. The convergence speed is analyzed using 
7uni-modal and six multi-modal functions. NL of MAOA converges more quickly than 
DE and BOA. NL error is smaller than BOA and DE. Rani et al. [13] have put out an NL 
topology for maritime search and rescue use. RSSI-based SSA is proposed, and the RSSI 
algorithm is used to compute the distance between the AN and TN. The value of the envi-
ronment constant and path loss component is essential to the accuracy of node localization, 
and both values chosen for distance computation are not mentioned. SSA has 10% less NL 
error than BOA and PSO. The performance parameters are NL accuracy, localized nodes, 
NL errors, and computation time. Mohar et al. [40] have modified two Bat optimization 
algorithms (BOA) to localize the sensor nodes and overcome the drawbacks of the original 
BOA. Regarding NL error and computation time, NL based on BOA performs better than 
existing optimization techniques. The original BOA is modified, and the first variant of 
BOA is used to improve the global search strategy, and the second variant of BOA is used 
to improve the local search strategy. The performance of the proposed variants of BOA 
70797 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:70793–70814 
1 3
is compared with the original BOA, PSO, GWO, BFOA, SSOA, and FOA. Muhammad 
Faheem et al. [43] proposed a scheme based on Industry 4.0 which is cost-effective and 
provides high-quality electricity. To ensure the quality of service (QoS) standards in the 
smart grid, efficient monitoring, and real-time management of unexpected changes in the 
power generating and distribution operations are crucial. Muhammad Faheem et al. [44] 
proposed a scheme based on Industry 4.0 and a huge data set derived from commercial 
Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) with Internet of Things (IoT) support. A total of 450 sen-
sors and 100 optical sensors are deployed to capture data from the real-time environment. 
The plan plays an essential role in improving system service performance to increase effi-
ciency while improving customer experience. Muhammad Faheem et  al. [45] presented 
an innovative method for data collection leveraging the smart grid’s Internet of software-
defined mobile sinks and WSNs. simulation is performed using EstiNet9.0. The developed 
system performs better than competing methods and accomplishes its specified objectives 
for events-driven applications in the SG. Packet delivery ratio, delay, throughput, and 
residual energy are the performance parameters. Similar kind of research work [46–52] is 
also caried out by the researchers to improve the performance of the proposed system.
Conclusion drawn from the related works  Table  1 shows the summery of the related 
work . The accuracy of NL may significantly impact the performance of a WSN. The accu-
racy of the NL still needs to improve due to the path loss component and environment 
constant, which are not calibrated and whose values were chosen based on some assump-
tions. Authors have proposed numerous node-positing methods and meta-heuristic optimi-
zation schemes for accurate target node location. Appropriate path loss components and an 
environment constant are needed to enhance node localization. To further enhance NL, the 
meta-heuristic algorithm can be modified.
3  Background
In this section, the description of NL, SOA, chaotic maps, and levy flight problem is 
explained. As shown in Fig.  1, NL schemes can be broadly categorized into centralized and 
distrusted NL. Range-free and range-based are the distributed NL schemes [33–35, 39]. 
The range-based NL(RBNL) accuracy is low compared to range-free NL(RFNL) schemes. 
The position of the target nodes is estimated by RFNL using information about the net-
work topology and connectivity to surrounding nodes. Range-based schemes perform the 
NL using either distance or angle. The combination of distance and angle can be used for 
NL, too. The Received Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) [21–23] is the most widely used 
technique for estimating node position using node distance. Other location-aware strategies 
include Triangulation, Angle of Arrival (AoA), Time Difference of Arrival (TDoA), Time 
of Arrival (ToA), and Maximum Likelihood (ML) [32, 38].
3.1  Notation
Table 2 presents some abbreviation used in this work.
70798 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:70793–70814
1 3Table 1  Summery of the related work
Ref. & Year Methodology/Algorithm Research Gap Performance Parameter
[12] 2021 GTOA The optimization algorithm is mentioned only and the algorithm used for 
distance estimation between an anchor and target node is not mentionedNL, NL Error
[25] 2021 RSSI The RSSI method is used for distance estimation but the environment 
constant and path loss component value is essential to the accuracy of node 
localization and the constant value chosen lies between 2 to 5
The fixed value of path loss exponent 2.3 is chosen which may affect the NL 
accuracyAverage NL errors and computation time
[35] 2021 CS-GWO All nodes are GPS enabled which consumes more power and cost-effective 
approachNL, Mean NL error,
[36] 2021 QUATRE Required some hardware and not cost-effective NL accuracy, NL error
[37] 2020 MCB, PSO There is a defect in MCB algorithms. Because all the candidate positions are 
generated randomly in an anchor box, no searching direction exists, which 
makes the time cost quite high and localization efficiency low. It may not 
be suitable for high mobility requirementsNL error, NL computation time
[2] 2019 SSA The NL is primarily needed and method used for NL is not mentioned NL accuracy, computation time and mean NL error
[3] 2019 DV-HOP, PSO So many chaotic maps are available and a sine chaotic map is chosen for 
simulations and it is not mentioned why only a sine map is chosen for itNL and NL Error
[18] 2022 MAOA, DV-Hop This paper only discussed the application of node localization based on the 
two-dimensional plane in WSNsExecution Time, Average NL error
[19] 2018 RSSI and Bat Algorithm RSSI scheme is used for distance estimation between anchor node and target 
node but the value of environment constant and Path loss component value 
is not mentionedMean NL error, mean NL time
[3] 2017 GOA The method used for NL is not mentioned mean NL error, computation time, and NL
[4] 2017 BFOA The trilateration method is used for distance computation but the value of 
environment constant and Path loss component value is not mentionedMean NL, mean NL error and mean computation time
[1] 2016 WOA Covered only single objective function and multi-objective function is not 
dissuadedAverage cost function and standard deviation
70799 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:70793–70814 
1 3
Node Localization(NL)
Source/Trarg et NL (Centralized )
Single Target  
Loc.(STL)Multi Target  
Loc.(M TL)
STL WB SNMTL 
WBSNNode Self Localization  (Distributed )
Range Based Loc
TOAT DOA
RSSI AoARange Free Loc.
Gradient DV-Hop  
Multi-
HopPIT
Centroid
Fig. 1  NL Taxonomy
Table 2  Description of 
abbreviationAbbreviation Description
A Variable representing motion behaviour
ANLA Average node localization accuracy
ANLE Average node localization error
ANLT Average node localization computation time
B Random number
C(t) New position of the search agent
D(t) Distance covered by the Best-fit search agent
dest(i) Estimated distance between TN & AN
dact(i) Actual distance between TN & AN
itrMax Total Number of Iteration
fc Frequency constant
M(t) Position of the search agent at time t
NLE Node localization error
pbest(t) Position of the best search agent at time t
u Correlation constant
v Correlation constant
/u1D6FC Step size
β Chaotic index
r Radius
rd Random Number between 0 to 1
/u1D703 Random angle between [0, 2π]
/u1D706 Levy exponent
70800 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:70793–70814
1 3
3.2  SOA
The SOA is a meta-heuristic algorithm shown in Algorithm 1.
The mathematical model of SOA [29] mainly depends on exploration and exploitation. 
The exploration phase is accomplished with three conditions. Collision avoidance, move-
ments toward the best neighbor’s direction, and being close to the best search agent. To 
avoid collisions with other seagulls, variable A is employed to estimate the new position of 
the search agent(seagull) as follows:
where C(t) is the new position of the search agent and P(t) is the current position of the 
other search agent that does not collide with another search agent at iteration t.
A represents the motion behavior of the search agent in each search space. A  is a 
variable that represents the motion behavior of the search agent in each search space. 
The behavior of variable A  is controlled using the frequency constant(fc). The value of 
fc is 2.
where tis the iteration from 0 to itrMax, and the value of A decreases from fc to 0.
Then search agent moves in the direction of the best solution.(1) C(t)=A∗P(t);
(2) A=fc−t∗/parenleft.s3fc
itrMax/parenright.s3
(3) M(t)=B−Pbest(t)−P(t)
70801 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:70793–70814 
1 3
where M(t) is the position of the search agent P(t) towards the best search agent pbest(t) . B 
is a random number that balances the local and global search agents.
where the random number (rd) lies between 0 to 1.
Now search agent moves in the direction of the best search agent.
where D(t) represents the best-fit search agent.
The search agents can change the speed and angle for attacking the prey. While 
attacking the prey, the search agent moves in a spiral shape. The motion behavior of the 
agent 3-D planes is as follows:
where the radius spiral is r and /u1D703  is a random angle between [0, 2π].
The correlation constants are u and v of the spiral shape, and e is the base of the 
natural logarithm. The attack position of the search agent is constantly updated.
where P(t) saves the best solution and updates the position of other search agents.
3.3  Chaotic maps
The meaning of chaos [6 , 10, 14–17] is defined by properties of deterministic, nonlinear, 
semi-stochastic, and sensitive dependence. For best results, choosing the initial values 
carefully is crucial because chaotic maps are very sensitive to changes in the initial con-
ditions. Chaos is the randomness of straightforward deterministic dynamic systems in 
mathematics, and chaotic systems can be thought of as sources of randomness. Chaos 
employs chaotic variables rather than random variables. Ergodicity and non-repetition 
are other valuable properties that enhance the search process. Chaotic can avoid reach-
ing local maxima. Although the meta-heuristic optimization algorithm is robust, effi-
cient, flexible, and very popular in the research community, it has a slow convergence 
speed. To improve the performance of the optimization scheme, the logistic chaotic map 
shown in Fig.  2 is found to be more suitable out of the 10 chaotic maps shown in Table  3. (4) B=2∗A2−rd
(5) D(t)=M(t)+C(t)
(6) (x,y,z)=/parenleft.s1r∗cos/u1D703,r∗ sin/u1D703 ,r∗/u1D703wherer =u∗e/u1D703v/parenright.s1
(7) P(t)=D(t)∗x∗y∗z+pbest(t)
Fig. 2  Logistic map of the cha-
otic function

70802 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:70793–70814
1 3
Randomness is the basic property of the meta-hubristic optimization algorithms, which 
is modified using a chaotic map to improve the performance of the algorithm. A total 
200 iterations are performed for the generation of the random number between 0 to 1.
3.4  Levy flight
Levy flight is just a random walk with step lengths that adhere to the levy distribution, a 
probability distribution with a heavy tail depicted in Fig.  3. Levy distribution is a series 
of small steps. When a walk is said to have a dimension more than once, the directions 
in which the steps are taken are isotropic. Lévy-flight can improve population diversity to 
speed up the convergence and reduce the local optimum. Better exploitation and explora-
tion balance is made possible with the help of this strategy. A seagull follows the levy flight 
distribution. The levy flight can suddenly take a more extended step size.
(8) pt+1
i=pt
ia⊗levy(𝜆)Table 3  List of chaotic maps
Sr.NO Name Chaotic map Constant Range
1 Tent mapxi+1=/braceleft.s3
𝜇xi,forxi<0.5
𝜇(1−x)i,forxi≥0.5/u1D707=2 (0,1)
2 Logistic map xi+1=/u1D707
4xi/parenleft.s11−xi/parenright.s10≤/u1D707≤4 (0,1)
3 Sine map xi+1=/u1D707
4sin/u1D70Bxi0<𝜇≤4 (0,1)
4 Kent mapxi+1=/braceleft.s3xi
m,0<xi<m
1−xi,m<xi<10 < m < 1 (0,1)
5 Circle map xi+1=xi+/u1D707−/u1D70F
2/u1D70Bsin2/u1D70Bximod 1 /u1D707=0.5,/u1D70F=0.2 (0,1)
6 Cubic map xi+1=cxi/parenleft.s11−x2
i/parenright.s1C = 2.59 (0,1)
7 Singer map xi+1=/u1D707(7.86 xi−23.31 x2
i+28.75 x3
i−13.3 x4
i)0.9≤/u1D707≤1.08 (0,1)
8 Gauss map
xi+1=/braceleft.s4
1,ifxi=0
1
ximod 1otherwise/u1D707=6 (0,1)
9 Square map xi+1=/parenleft.s11−/u1D707x2
i/parenright.s1/u1D707=2
10 Sinusoidal map xi+1=/u1D6FCx2
isin/u1D70Bxi/u1D6FC=2.3 (0,1)
Fig. 3  Randomness of levy flight

